---
"#": 8
title: The Psychology of Motivation
subject: Introduction
Teacher: "[[Sh. Muhammad Tim Humble]]"
Semester: 0
Week: 1 - Maximum Motivation
Watched: 2026-01-08
Notes: 2026-01-08
anki: 2026-01-08
last-reviewed:
source_url: https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/maximum-motivation-week-1?cid=4556201&permalink=8-the-psychology-of-motivation
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover:
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
This lesson is a summary of the famous theories in psychology regarding motivation, viewed in light of the Quran and Sunnah.

It is important to keep in mind that **non Muslim psychologists will always leave out the bigger issues** (the help of Allah, Iman etc):

> [!Quran] [[al-Rum]] ([[30-7]])
> 
> يَعْلَمُونَ ظَـٰهِرًۭا مِّنَ ٱلْحَيَوٰةِ ٱلدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ عَنِ ٱلْـَٔاخِرَةِ هُمْ غَـٰفِلُونَ ٧
> 
> They know what is apparent of the worldly life, but they, of the Hereafter, are unaware.

# Forms of Motivation

Psychologists tell us motivation can come in different forms, and that **all forms of motivation can be helpful or limiting depending on the context**.

These categories determine:
- the situations in which we feel motivated
- the depth of motivation
- the sustainability of motivation

## Intrinsic motivation

**The reward is doing the action itself** - "Doing it because you love it."


> [!quote] [[Imam Ahmad]] said when asked if he sought knowledge for the sake of Allah:
> 
> لله؟ عزيز! ولكن شيء حُبِّبَ إليَّ فعملتُه
> 
> For Allah!? That is difficult! Rather, the affair was made beloved to me, so I did it.

In the context of Islam and seeking knowledge, intrinsic motivation is connected to the sweetness of Iman.

[[Ibn al-Qayyim]] explained that the love one has for worshipping Allah is a fruit of loving Allah. **So the person has to love Allah first, and then the sweetness of the actions will follow**.

## Extrinsic Motivation

**External pressures that drive behaviour** - can be punishments and rewards.

Psychologists say that intrinsic motivation lasts longer. But the two should be used together: Extrinsic motivation can give the initial impetus, which leads to intrinsic motivation.

For example, the person initially worships out of fear of punishment and hope for reward, which leads them to loving Allah, which leads them to tasting the sweetness of the action itself.

## Identified motivation

**Working towards goals that align with ones personality, values and identity.**

For example, I am a student of knowledge, so I want to memorise texts. The person is not motivated by a love of memorising texts per se, nor by an external pressure, but because the action i s in line with their identiy. 

## Introjected Motivation

Type of extrinsic motivation where people act due to internal pressures like guilt, shame, or the need to maintain self-esteem, rather than genuine interest or values.

Often viewed as negative, but positive peer pressure and feelings of guilt and shame can be a blessing from Allah.

> [!hadith] [[Imran ibn Hussain]] narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:
> 
> الْحَيَاءُ لاَ يَأْتِي إِلاَّ بِخَيْرٍ
> 
> Modesty brings forth nothing but goodness
> 
> {{ Sahih Muslim 37a }}

So this form is not bad if it leads to another form of motivation - fir example the person feels guilt, which leads them to fear punishment, which leads them to intrinsic motivation.  

But if a person only worries about what others think of them, then this could fall under riyaa'.

# Theories of motivation

## Self determination theory

This theory is useful but must be amended to include the clear understanding that the person is in need of Allah.

The theory consists of the following ideas:

**Autonomy** - maintaining control of your actions.

*The problem is that this ignores the fact that you cannot do anything without the help of Allah.*

Could be given consideration if viewed as taking control of ones efforts, taking the correct means, not being forced by other people etc. But has to be with the full acknowledgement that no action can be taken without the help of Allah.

**Competence** - believing in your ability to carry out the task effectively

Again - this needs to be caveat-ed with **"with the help of Allah"**.

**Relatedness** -developing meaningful connections with other people

This is very beneficial, because ones companions has a big impact.

## Expectancy Theory

When belief in outcome fuels action:

**Expectancy** (E) - the belief that effort will lead to successful performance

*"If I put in effort, I will be able to memorise 5 pages per week, in sha Allah"*

**Instrumentality** (I) - the belief the successful performance will bring about the desired outcome

*"If I consistently memorise 5 pages per week, in time I will become a Hafith, in sha Allah"*

**Valance** (V) - believing the outcome has real value to you.

*"Becoming a Hafith is a goal that holds weight"*

It is often framed as Motivation $M = E \times I \times V$, such that if any of the three are near 0, then motivation nears 0.

# Pitfalls in motivation

## The fallacy of "All or Nothing"

This is damaging and contrary to the Sunnah:

> [!Hadith] [['Aishah]] narrated that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) said:
> 
> سَدِّدُوا وَقَارِبُوا، وَاعْلَمُوا أَنْ لَنْ يُدْخِلَ أَحَدَكُمْ عَمَلُهُ الْجَنَّةَ، ==وَأَنَّ أَحَبَّ الأَعْمَالِ أَدْوَمُهَا إِلَى اللَّهِ، وَإِنْ قَلَّ==
> 
> "Do good deeds properly, sincerely and moderately and know that your deeds will not make you enter Paradise, and that **the most beloved deed to Allah is the most regular and constant even if it were little**."

## Not Developing Resilience

People are able to develop resilience:

> [!quote] [[Abdullah ibn Mas'uud]] said
> 
> إِنَّمَا العِلْمُ بِالتَّعَلُّمِ، وَإِنَّمَا الحِلْمُ بِالتَّحَلُّمِ.
> 
> “Knowledge is only attained by learning, and forbearance is only attained by training oneself to be forbearing.”

## Perfectionism and Procrastination

Perfectionists are sometimes so afraid of perfection that they will not get started.

## Disconnection from Purpose and Meaning

Feeling that a persons work is not worth anything.

## The Effect of Environmental and Psychological Triggers

The wrong environment can cause one to lack motivation. eg cluttered and noisy.

## Not Understanding One's Personal Motivation

Need to find which of these things affect your motivation, which need addressing etc

Having a personal mission statement could help.