---
"#": 28
title: " 28. Obstacle: Distractions on the Road"
subject: Introduction
Teacher: "[[Sh. Muhammad Tim Humble]]"
Semester: 0
Week: 3 - The Correct Method
Watched: 2026-01-23
Notes: 2026-01-23
anki: 2026-01-23
last-reviewed:
source_url: https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/the-correct-method-week-3?cid=4579819&permalink=28-obstacle-distractions-on-the-road
banner:
cover:
icon:
---
The previous lesson was regarding ways that the shaytan will attempt to divert the student in method.

This lesson is about what the shaytan will do if he fails in this - how he will attempt to divert the student who has the right method

Recall the six ways that [[Ibn al-Qayyim]] said the shaytan will attempt to diver the person:

1. Kufr and shirk
2. Bid'ah
3. Major sins
4. Lesser sins
5. Becoming busy with permissible things instead of good things
6. Becoming busy with something less virtuous with something that is more virtuous

Here the focus will mostly on the last two - being distracted with that which is permissible, and that which is less good. Sins and their affects on knowledge will be discussed in a later week.

# Distractions in the Religion
[01:41](https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/the-correct-method-week-3?cid=4579819&permalink=28-obstacle-distractions-on-the-road#01:41) 

- **Being busy with less virtuous knowledge**
	
	Includes being distracted with study that is not part of the road-map

- **Being distracted from action by knowledge**

	One of the biggest calamities that can befall the student of knowledge

	Even worse if the student leaves action that which they used to be keen to do.

- **Being distracted from knowledge by action**

	So both sides are problematic, and contained within the ayah:

> [!quran] [[Al-Fatiha]] ([[1-7]]) 
> 
> صِرَٰطَ ٱلَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ غَيْرِ ٱلْمَغْضُوبِ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا ٱلضَّآلِّينَ ٧
> 
> The path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, not of those who have earned [Your] anger or of those who are astray.

So you must combine knowledge and action.

# Distractions in the Worldly Life
[06:15](https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/the-correct-method-week-3?cid=4579819&permalink=28-obstacle-distractions-on-the-road#06:15) 

- **Job or school**

	There will almost certainly always be commitments in life.
	
	Very few people have "التَّفَرّثغ" - being completely free (to seek knowledge)
	
	Solution: make the Aakhirah the major concern & the priority, even if at at a particular time ones job or studies temporarily take up more time.

> [!Hadith] [[Ibn 'Umar]] narrated that the Prophet (ﷺ) supplicated:
> 
> 
>  ==وَلاَ تَجْعَلِ الدُّنْيَا أَكْبَرَ هَمِّنَا وَلاَ مَبْلَغَ عِلْمِنَا==
> 
>  **and do not make this world our greatest concern, nor the limit of our knowledge**, 
> 
> {{ Jami' at-Tirmidhi 3502 }}

- **Family**

	Solutions include:
	- Use knowledge to know your responsibilities towards them
	- Involve your family in your journey
	- See being good to them as the fruits of knowledge

- **Permissible worldly matters** (from interests, hobbies, entertainment etc)

	Ideally one would get rid of anything that doesn't benefit in the aakhirah. But this is the highest level of zuhd and is difficult to achieve.
	
	The way to progress in this area:
	1. Remove matters which are Haram
	2. Remove matters which are doubtful
	3. Remove time-consuming permissible matters

- **Digital devices**