---
"#": 13
title: Attaining Knowledge Gradually
Course: "[[2. Attributes of the Student of Knowledge]]"
Teacher: "[[Tim Humble]]"
Level: "[[0 - Introduction]]"
Pathway: "[[Introduction]]"
Watched: 2025-12-21
Notes: 2025-12-21
last-reviewed:
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover: https://alpha.uscreencdn.com/video_thumbnails/lkFzINkrkSnQxw.jpg?key1=N4Eo6Dvm8yzQRt37IXnTlY8KlYQ63qLFrMGrGnDT88kgwhScEJD/zoqclB+zAlHb&key2=5b1eaa6a99a05c86dad433121dbe6950
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
Recall this course looks at the students approach to studying from two parts:
1. The attributes of the students
2. The method of study

The attributes of the students has been discussed. Now is time to discuss the methods of study.

# Methods of study
## Taking things in stages - التَّدَرُّج

A good way to translate التدرج would be gradual progression.


> [!Quran] [Ali 'Imran (3:79)](https://quran.com/3/79)
> مَا كَانَ لِبَشَرٍ أَن يُؤْتِيَهُ ٱللَّهُ ٱلْكِتَـٰبَ وَٱلْحُكْمَ وَٱلنُّبُوَّةَ ثُمَّ يَقُولَ لِلنَّاسِ كُونُوا۟ عِبَادًۭا لِّى مِن دُونِ ٱللَّهِ وَلَـٰكِن كُونُوا۟ رَبَّـٰنِيِّـۧنَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تُعَلِّمُونَ ٱلْكِتَـٰبَ وَبِمَا كُنتُمْ تَدْرُسُونَ ٧٩
> 
> It is not for a human [prophet] that Allāh should give him the Scripture and authority and prophethood and then he would say to the people, "Be servants to me rather than Allāh," but [instead, he would say], "Be pious scholars of the Lord because of what you have taught of the Scripture and because of what you have studied."

رَبَّانِيّ
Nurturing scholar.

[[Imam al Bukhari]] brought the following statement in his Saheeh, but did not attribute it to anyone, but [[al-Qurtubi]] said something similar is narrated by [[Abdullah ibn 'Abbas]].

 
> [!Quote] [[Imam al Bukhari]] mentioned:
> وَالرَّبَّانِيُّ الَّذِي يُرَبِّي النَّاسَ بِصِغَارِ الْعِلْمِ قَبْلَ كِبَارِهِ
> 
> The Rabbani is the one who nurtures the people on the smaller kinds of knowledge before larger kinds of knowledge

### The stages of study

#### 1. The stage of establishing the fundamentals - مرحلة التأسيس

This is usually the first stage, but is the second stage in AMAU

This is to get a general understanding (التَّصَوُّر / a picture or overview) of each science. This stage is not about getting detailed evidence, ikhtilaf or similar.

Examples of books at this stage (not a comprehensive list):

- Tawhid
    - [[Usool al-Thalatha]] by [[Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab]]
    - [[al-Qawa'id al-Arba']] by [[Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab]] 
- Fiqh
    - Hanbali: [[Umdat al-Fiqh]] by [[Ibn al-Qudama]]
	- Shafi’i: [[Matn Abi Shuja']] by [[Abu Shuja' al-Asfahani]] (d 488 AH)
- Arabic
    - Nahw
        - [[al-Ajurumiyyah]] by [[Muhammad ibn Ajrum]] (d 723 AH)
    - Sarf
        - [[Lamiyyah al-Af'al]] by Muhammad ibn Abi Abdullah ibn Malik (d 672 AH)
    - Adab (Literature/Poetry)
        - [[Lamiyyah al-'Arab]], a poem by [[Thabit ibn Awaas al-Shamfawi]] (d 70 years before Hijra, from the poets of jaahiliyyah)
        - [[Baanat Su'ad]] by [[Ka'b ibn Suhair]] (companion, d 24 AH)
- Usool al Fiqh
    - Maliki, Shafi’i, Hanbali: [[al-Waraqaat]] by [[Haramain abu Ma'aali al-Juwayni]] (d 478 AH)
    - Hanafi generally has a separate approach
- Tafsir
    - [[Tafsir al-Jalalayn]] by [[Al-Suyuti]] (d 911 AH)  & [[Jalaluddin al-Mahalli]] (d 864 AH)
    - [[Tafsir al-Sa'di]] by [[Imam al-Sa'di]] (d 1375 AH)
- al Qawa'id al Fiqhiyyah
    - [[Mandhuumah al-Qawa'id al-Fiqhiyyah]] by [[Imam al-Sa'di]]

Note: these books are studying all around the world with a general acceptance from the people of knowledge of the Ummah. But some of the authors may not have had the correct belief in all aspects. For example, [[Haramain abu Ma'aali al-Juwayni]] and [[Al-Suyuti]]. There mistakes may be present in their books, hence the need for a grounded teacher.

#### 2. The stage of evidence مرحلة التَّدلِيل

(The third stage in AMAU)

This stage is about learning and memorising evidence for what has been studied, as well as how the evidence is being used as a proof (وجه الدلالة).

This is stage is not about detailed analysis, or comparing different views.

Examples of books at this stage:

- Tawhid
	- [[Kitab al-Tawhid]] by [[Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab]] - each chapter contains a collection of evidence followed by a list of points which are the "وجه الدلالة"
- Arabic
    - Nahw
        - [[Qatr al-Nada]] by [[ibn al-Hishaam al-Ansari]] (d 761 AH)
    - Sarf
        - [[Shadh al-'Arf]] by [[Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Hamalaawi]] (d 1315 AH)
- Usool al Fiqh
    - [[Rawdah al-Naadhir]] by [[Ibn al-Qudama]]
- Fiqh
    - Shafi’i:
        - [[Umdah al-Saalik]] by [[Ahmad ibn Naqeeb al-Misri]] (d 769 AH)
        - [[Zad al Mustaqni']] by [[Musa al-Hajaawi]] (d 968 AH)
- Tafsir
    - Ma'aalim al-Tanzil  (commonly known as [[Tafsir al-Baghawi]]) by [[al-Husain ibn Mas’ud al-Baghawi]] (d 516 AH)
- al Qawa'id al Fiqhiyyah
    - [[Mandhuumah al-Fadfari]] by [[Anwar Abdullah ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Fadhfari]]

#### 3 - The stage of comparative study - مرحلة العلم المقارن

(Fourth stage at AMAU)

To know what is for you and what is against you.

This stage does not contain a detailed response to everything that your opponent brings, but rather knowing what the different opinions are and what their evidences are.

Examples of books at this stage:

- Aqeedah
    - al-Risala al-Tadmuriyyah by [[Ibn Taymiyyah]]
- Fiqh
    - Hanbali: [[Haashiyyah al-Rawd al Murbi']] by [[Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn Qasim al-'Asimi al-Najdi]] (d 392 AH)
    - Shafi’i: [[Minhaaj al-Taalibin]] by [[Imam al-Nawawi]]
 - Nahw & Sarf
    - [[Alfiyyah ibn Malik]] by [[Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Malik]]
- Usool al Fiqh
    - [[Irshad al-Fuhuul]] by  [[Imam al-Shawkani]] (Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-Shawkani, d 1250 AH)

This is broadly speaking the last stage that a student memorises a matn in each science (word for word or by meaning/partial).

#### 4. The stage of developing your own opinions - مرحلة التحرير

Composing and articulating ones own opinions, and being able to respond to the opinions of others.

Examples of books at this stage:

- Aqeedah
    - Jawaab al-I'tiraadaat al-Misriyyah by [[Ibn Taymiyyah]]
    - Misbah al-Dhalam by [[Abd al-Latif ibn Abd al-Rahman Aal al-Shaykh]] (d 1293 AH)
- Fiqh
    - Shafi’i: al-Majmu' Sharh al Mudhadhab by [[Imam al-Nawawi]]
    - Hanbali: [[al-Mughni]] by [[Ibn al-Qudama]] 
 - Usool al Fiqh
	- Mukhtasar at-Tahrir AKA al-Kawkab al-Muneer by  [[Ibn al-Najjaar]] (Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Fatoohi)

#### 5. The stage of specialization - مرحلة التخصيص

This is about becoming a specialist in a particular field,

This should be left as late as possible. A big contemporary issue is this stage is brought very early, often after stage completing stage 1 and 2.

Stage 3 and 4 are not specialisation/not for the specialists of that field only.


> [!quote] [[Imam Al-Shafi'i]] said 
> مَنْ تَعَلَّمَ عِلْمًا فَلْيُدَقِّقْ فِيهِ لِئَلَّا يُضَيِّعَ دَقِيقَ الْعِلْمِ
> 
> Whoever learns a science, let him go into it's fine details, so that the finer details of knowledge are not lost

> [!Quote] [[Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi]] said
>  إِذَا أَرَدْتَ أَنْ تَكُونَ عَالِمًا فَاقْصِدْ لِفَنٍّ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ وَإِنْ أَرَدْتَ أَنْ تَكُونَ أَدِيبًا فَخُذْ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ أَحْسَنَهُ
>  
>  If you want to be a scholar, seek out a particular science within knowledge (become a specialist), and if you want to become a writer, take the best of everything.

> [!Bio] [[Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi]]
> d 173 AH
> Great scholar of the Arabic language
> Teacher of [[Al-Sibawayh]]

The previous stages are completed with a teacher. This stage is completed with a supervisor.

#### 0. The introductory stage - المدخل

The first stage at AMAU

Very important to complete the Madkhal prior to entering the later stages. 

The purpose is to come before the first stage, to give the student what is needed to study the later books. Often, when a teacher teaches these later books, they will give the details from the Madkhal in the introduction to their course. At AMAU, this has been separated out into it's on stage.

This is the one stage that is not based on studying a book. (Though there is recommended reading, and the course is based upon different books). This is why it is not put in the later stages.


## How to look at a Mas'ala

مسألة - 
literal translation - something that is asked about
more precise translation for what we are talking about - particular issue of discussion

eg how many Rak'ah is the Sunnah prior to Dhuhr.

(term is not limited to fiqh)

What is needed when approaching a mas'alah?

### 1. Having an overview of the issue - تصور المسألة

Having a general understanding / general picture.

For example, knowing what is included in that issue, and what is not in that issue.

For example, the rulings on "used water". Before discussing how it can be used, you need to ensure that you know what is considered "used water". Is it the water that drips from your arms in wudhu? Or is it the water that remains in the bucket? What of the water that goes down the drain and is recycled into the system?

### 2. Knowing the ruling

Now we know what this mas'alah is about, we need to know the ruling that is attached:
- Obligatory (واجب)
- Recommended (مستحب)
- Permissible (حلال)
- Disliked (مكروه)
- Prohibited (حرام)

### 3. Knowing the evidence

Need to know:
- The evidence itself
- It's type (Ayah, Hadith, Qiyas etc)
- It's source
- It's grade
- How it links to the issue

### 4. Knowing the similarities and differences - الجوامع والفوارق

Could even be considered to be part of the first stage, as it entails having an understanding of what the issue includes.

Things can appear to be similar but be different, and vice versa.

### 5. Knowing the levels of commands and prohibitions - الجوامع والفوارق

Not just the difference between waajib and mustahab, but the priority/importance within eg the waajibaat.

Includes placing the mas'alah in the bigger picture, seeing where it fits in, and thus being able to know the relative importance/priority.

---

In following this process properly, you will have an increased understanding, and will avoid confusion (eg seeing the differences, and getting confused or thinking every difference is valid etc)

Of course there will be issues that will be difficult and some times that you will not understand a particular issue. But that should not be the norm with the majority of issues.

We can summarise the understanding of the mas

1. Properly understanding the issue (Includes the tasawwur, the Hukm, the Jawaami'& Fawaariq, maraatib al-masaa'il)
2. ??? Video cut off before Ustadh mentioned this