---
"#": 14
title: Student's Methodology with Books
Course: "[[2. Attributes of the Student of Knowledge]]"
Teacher: "[[Tim Humble]]"
Level: "[[0 - Introduction]]"
Pathway: "[[Introduction]]"
Watched: 2025-12-22
Notes:
last-reviewed:
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover: https://alpha.uscreencdn.com/video_thumbnails/Y6zOvcZ80B1Rnw.jpg?key1=kS5EbplATNKssMUBAw/29GSdMCI71jBOaZQdaxKogx4n4xEAwH1YoU6hnxlgnIDO&key2=0bd0529ddde782c38afff28fbeb69c3a
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
Books are important: Knowledge used to be in the hearts of men, and it was written down in books, thus it has been transmitted to us.

The problem:
How can a student of knowledge handle studying so many books? Can he ever hope to remember them all?

Humans are forgetful. Some of the scholars mentioned that the word Insan is related to the word nisyan (forgetfulness). Humans are inherently forgetful.

Thus we need a methodology.

You may say: take good notes. This is good, but then there will come a stage where you will have large amounts of notes, you will struggle to understand what you have written, and you will struggle to find what you need.

You may say: then you should index your notes. This is also helpful, but there is a better way.


> [!Important] The method
> You choose a single book in each science, and for every other book, you take the knowledge and bring it into that one single book.
> 
> You can occasionally make it 2 or 3 books, if the science has distinct sub sciences. But have as few books as possible.
> 
> These books become your core reference of knowledge, and each should be revised 3-4 times a year.

So bring the quotes and benefits from the other books to the reference book. If the quote is long, you may just bring the beginning or a reference to the source, or just a bullet point.

Thus by reading this one book, eventually it will be like reading 100s of books, because the knowledge from all these books has been consolidated into one.

It is important to choose a book that is sufficiently detailed that you do not have to write too much on the outside.

Usually will be consolidating onto a sharh rather than a matn.

# Reference Books

Example of some of the books that could be used as the core book:

- Tawhid
    - [[Fath al-Majid li Sharh Kitab al-Tawhid]] by [[Abd al-Rahman  ibn Hassan Aal al-Shaykh]]
- Aqeedah
    - [[Sharh al-Aqeedah al-Tahawiyyah]] by [[Ibn Abi al-Izz al-Hanafi ]] (d 792 AH)
- Fiqh
    - Shafi’i
        - [[Minhaaj al-Taalibin]] by [[Imam al-Nawawi]]
    - Hanbali: [[Haashiyyah al-Rawd al Murbi']] by  [[Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn Qasim al-'Asimi al-Najdi]]
- Usool al Fiqh
    - [[Rawdah al-Naadhir]] by [[Ibn al-Qudama]]
- Tafsir
    - [[Tafsir Ibn Kathir]] by [[Ibn Kathir]]
    OR
    - [[Tafsir al-Baghawi]] by [[al-Husain ibn Mas’ud al-Baghawi]]
- Nahw & Sarf
    - Sharh Alfiayyat ibn Malik by Abdullahi ibn Abdulrahman ibn Aqil رَحِمَهُ ٱللَّٰهُ
    - [[Sharh Alfiayyah ibn Malik]] by [[Abdullah ibn Abd al-Rahman ibn Aqil]] (d 769 AH)
- Mustalah al Hadith
    - [[Fath al-Mughith]] bi Sharh Alfiyyah al Hadith  [[Shams al-Deen al Sakhawi]] (d 902 AH)
- Illal al Hadith
    - [[Sharh Illal al-Tirmidhi]] by [[Ibn Rajab]] al-Hanbali (d 795 AH)
- Sharh al Hadith. Depends on how much time and energy.
	Minimum:
    - [[Subul al-Salam]] (Explanation of [[Bulugh al-Muraam]]) by [[Muhammad ibn Isma'il al-Amir al-San'aani]] (d 1182 AH)
    Or, use [[Subul al-Salam]] for Hadith al-Ahkam, and consolidate further in:
	- Sharh Sahih Muslim by [[Imam al-Nawawi]]
	If you have lots of time and energy:
	- [[Fath al-Bari]] by [[Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani]] (d 852 AH)
	
# Reading Plan

There are three types of reading:

1. Planned reading (قِرَاءَةُ مَنْهَجِيَّةٌ)
    - Structured reading that is planned, and organized
    - Completing the consolidated core books every 3-4 months
    
Free reading (قراءة الحرة), which is of two types:
    - No specific time limit
1. Quick Reading
	- Reading relatively quickly without deep thinking and taking  detailed notes
	- Highlight some points of interest to bring to the core books
	- For example books by modern authors, academic papers, masters thesis
2. Structured reading
	- For example, by author (eg all the books of [[Ibn Taymiyyah]] or [[Ibn Rajab]], or all the explanations of a particular book)
	- These need to be read in a particular order, and these will be more detailed and take more effort/time


What do you have to memorise with AMAU?

Teacher will give specific instructions at each course, but in general:

Memorisation should be based on 2 things:
1. Priority
	- Memorise at least one comprehensive evidence for each major point that you have learned.
	- Try to be selective and not memorise things that are not important.
2. Ability
	- People differ in their ability to memorise
	- A given persons ability increases with practice and decreases with age
	- Start with small memorisation projects before large memorisation projects
	- Start with one evidence per point, and when ability increases, increase the number of evidences
	- Better to memorise one evidence for every point, rather than all the evidences for one point and no evidences for the remaining points.
	- When you have to make a choice between different texts, know yourself. If you lack the time, it is better to memorise a smaller book fully than a small part of a bigger book.
	- You could memorise a shorter book and then the longer book, but this may waste time in the long run.
	- Becomes easier with time - memory is like a muscle

Comes back to what Bukhari said - how much desire do you have, and how much time do you have to constantly look/revise.

Requires efficiency. There is too much to get through to waste time, getting lost, distracted or overwhelmed.

# The introductory courses - the madaakhil

Why do we have the introductory courses and not go straight to the books?

1. To introduce you to the topic, and understanding what the topic is all about.
2. Giving you the means/set of tools to access the subject (why it is the madkhal/entrance)
3. Help with terminology - will be specific to particular sciences and particular authors
4. Understand the history of the subject & how they relate to eachother
5. How is the subject structured? And how are topics divided between different subjects.

How did the scholars deal with this? There are books on the topic, but also the scholars would often include this in the preface of the book, or the introduction of the lesson.

What should we aim to learn in any introduction to a subject?

 
> [!Quote] [[Abu Al-Irfan Muhammad Bin Ali Al-Saban]] (d.1206 AH) said in poetry
> إنّ مبادئ كلّ فنّ عشرة ... الحدّ والموضوع ثمّ الثمرة
> وفضله ونسبته والواضع ... والاسم الاستمداد حكم الشّارع
> مسائل والبعض بالبعض اكتفى ... ومن درى الجميع حاز الشّرفا
> 
> The essentials of every science are 10 ... the definition, subject matter, then the fruit
> 
> It’s attribution, virtue, and the one who penned it ... It's name, it's source, and the ruling of it
> 
> Matters relating to it, and some of these can suffice you from learning other ... but whoever understands them all will attain nobility

So the 10 essentials are:

## 1. The definition - الحدّ / التعريف

1. Linguistic definition - التعريف اللغوي
2. Technical definition - التعريف الاصطلاحي

eg "Salah" has a linguistic meaning of "Du'a", while technically "it is a series of actions starting with Takbir and ending in Tasleem"

### Linguistic definition - التعريف اللغوي

Why do we bother with the linguistic definition?

- Arabic is the language of the Quran and Sunnah.
- The Arabic definition is the default to which we fall back on if there is no further Islamic explanation or context to the word
- Helps us to understand the basis of the technical definition - they are connected

Sources of the linguistic definition - well known dictionaries:
- [[al-Sihah]] by [[Abu Nasr Isma'il ibn Hammad al-Jawhari]] (d. 393 AH)
- [[Mu'jam Maqaayiis al-Lughah]] by [[Abu al-Husayn Ahmad ibn Faris]] (d. 395 AH)
- [[Lisan al-'Arab]] by Muhammad ibn Mukarram ([[Ibn Mandhur]] - d. 711 AH)
- [[al-Qamus al-Muhit]] by Majid ud-Din Muhammad ibn Ya’qub al Fayruzabadi (d 817 AH)
- Taj al-'Arus Min Jawahir al Qamus by al Murtada al Zubaidi (d 1205 AH)
- English
    - [[Lanes Lexicon]] by Edward William Lane (d 1876 CE) - best, based on the above text
    - [[Hans Wehr]] (Modern Arabic, still useful but not as useful as [[Lanes Lexicon]])
### Technical definition - التعريف الاصطلاحي

May differ between sciences - eg Sunnah

There to facilitate understand and are not perfect. The early generations did not obsess over technical definitions - they would often simply define by example.

In later times, much more time was spent in finding defnitions that were "jaam'i maan'i". Nothing wrong with giving definitions, but it is not the be all and end all of the subject - it is a means. 

Sources of Technical Definitions:
- The Quran and Sunnah may define explicitly
- Examples of books of Technical Definitions:
	- Mu'jam at Tarifat by [['Ali ibn Muhammad al Jurjani]] (d. 471 AH)
	- al-Hudud fi al-Usool by [[Sulayman ibn Khalaf al-Baaji]] (d. 474 AH)
	- al-Mufradat fi Gharib al Qur'an (specific to unusual/rare words in the Quran) by [[al-Raghib al-Isfahani]] (d. 502 AH)
	- Kashf al-Istilahat al Funun by [[Muhammad 'Ali al-Tahanawi]] (d. approx. 1191 AH)

## 2. The subject matter - المَوْضُوعُ

Knowing what is included in the science, and what is not included

For example, in Fiqh:
>The subject matter is the actions of those who are required to follow the rulings from the point of view of establishing the rulings of those actions

## 3. The fruit - الثَّمَرَة

We could consider this the benefit (faa'ida) or the goal (ghaaya) of the science

It is the answer to the question: 
	"What do I expect to get out of learning this subject?"
Or,
	"What is the goal of this subject?"

For example, in Hadith:
>The goal is to distinguish what is authentic and what is not

## 4. Attribution - نِسْبَةٌ

Refers to the origins of something ("liniage"). Ie where does it fit in with the other sciences?

Is it a primary science or supporting science? (Analogous to parent and child)

eg Tafsir - is a supporting science of Uloom al-Quran

## 5. Virtue - فَضْلُهُ

Every science has virtue, but some may have virtues specific to them

Knowing the virtue helps to keep you motivated and sincere. Discussed previously in [[2. The Virtue of Knowledge]]

eg, from the virtues of the sciences of the Quran:

> [!Hadith] Narrated 'Uthman
> خَيْرُكُمْ مَنْ تَعَلَّمَ الْقُرْآنَ وَعَلَّمَهُ
> 
> The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "The best among you (Muslims) are those who learn the Qur'an and teach it."

## 6. The one who first wrote it down الوَاضِع

For the early generations:
1. knowledge was primarily in peoples memory, not in books
2. the sciences were not separated, rather it was taught as one

With time there was a gradual process where knowledge was distilled, consolidated and organised into separate sciences, to make it easier to digest.

The earlier books in a science may not be as organised or focused on the science as later books.

So this point is to understand how the science was consolidated over time. 

This does not refer to introducing innovations. The knowledge is the same, it is the arrangement of this that developed.

## 7. The name - الإسم

Names can change over time, and their may be synonyms

eg Aqeedah, Iman, Tawhid, Fiq al Akbar etc

## 8. The source الاسْتِمْدَادُ

Each science has sources, and sources may differ between sciences.

eg Qiyas can be used in Fiqh, but not Aqeedah.

## 9. The ruling حُكمُ الشارع

Each science has a ruling, and could fall under any of the 5 rulings (and that which is obligatory may be an individual obligation and a communal obligation)

Remember: this applies to every science, not just Islamic sciences, and so there can be sciences that are Haram to learn.

## 10. Individual issues المَسَائِل

Two aspects that need to be covered at the introductory stage

1. A general overview of the Masa'il (like a contents page)
    - For example, in Fiqh how it is broken down into
	    - Acts of worship
		    - Purifcation
		    - Prayer
		    - Zakat
		    - ...
		- Transactions
		- ...	

2. An overview of some individual mas'aail
	- For example Tawhid, the division of Tawhid into categories, should be given in the madkhal, as this is part of understanding what the subject is about