---
"#": 16
title: The Author's Introduction
Course: "[[4. Ta'dheem-ul-ilm]]"
Teacher: "[[Tim Humble]]"
Level: "[[0 - Introduction]]"
Pathway: "[[Introduction]]"
Watched: 2025-12-23
Notes:
last-reviewed:
source_url: https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/introduction-to-studying-with-amau?cid=2809808&permalink=16-the-authors-introduction
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover: https://alpha.uscreencdn.com/video_thumbnails/bsahRMcfCRy1-Q.jpg?key1=A7y/mtC+8lgOYecc1DtDEuxGezkO8jlAzJhBwqdDEtzE+jWLqDYMCzS3b7eMUhNk&key2=ce3e2fad8149659ecac4cc8b0b997348
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
This foundation course is an exception to the rule in two senses:

1. It is a foundation course based on a book
2. It is based on a contemporary book and not a classical book

However, the book is taught here as it contains everything needed and more for the foundation course.

> [!Quote] Ustadh Tim Humble said regarding this book: 
> "Whoever understands what the shaykh has written in this book properly, they really, truly know the path to becoming a scholar."

**There is nobody who has set out on the path and failed to reach their goal except that the reason is mentioned in this book.**

Book: Ta'dheem ul Ilm by Shaykh [[Salih al 'Usaymi]].

The phrase "تعظيم العلم" means to treat knowledge as عظيم, ie to venerate it.  

# Author's Introduction

## Reason for the book

The shaykh explains the driving force behind writing this book:

> [!text] 
> From the acts of goodness towards this upcoming multitude and the generations to come is to guide them to the secret of possessing knowledge which will give them the success to achieve that which they hope for, and which will take them to a place of safety, out of mercy towards them, so that they are not lost in the desert of opinions and the darkness of desires

So this book has been written to show the students how to reach their goal, and to not be from those who get lost along the way.

## Gaining knowledge requires one to venerate it

> [!text]
>The amount of knowledge that a person gains is dependent upon the amount that his heart reveres it and honours it

> [!important] Important Principle
> The more your heart reveres knowledge, the more you will get it. And vice versa.

**This is the core of the book, and everything else follows on from it. It is a principle that must be internalised.**

Were a person to say, "my current circumstances do not allow me to seek knowledge", then what must be said to them is to start with revering knowledge in their heart. If they venerate knowledge and give it proper reverence, then the knowledge will come to them.

> [!text] 
> The greatest of help in achieving the reverence of knowledge and venerating it is to know the principles of revering it

So we know the importance of revering knowledge in order to gain it, and so we need principles as to *how* to revere knowledge.

As for the one who does not revere knowledge, the shaykh quotes the famous proverb:

> [!text]
> يَدَاكَ أَوْكَتا وَفُوكَ نَفَخَ
> 
> Your own hands tied [the knot] and your own mouth blew on it

This is similar to the English expression "you made your bed, now sleep in it".

This proverb comes in the context of a story of a group of people who needed to cross a body of water by swimming. They took their water skins, blew them up like balloons and tied the edge so that they became like a float. While swimming, one of their floats began to deflate, so this person called for help. His companions responded to him with what is now this proverb.

> [!text] 
> We will bring forth, Allāh willing, **a discussion of twenty principles** through which knowledge can be revered, without going extensively into them, since the situation cannot accommodate it, and going into them to the full extent of every point would need a prolonged amount of time. 

## Response to those who criticise

The shaykh goes on to mention that there will be people who criticise and claim that the reports in the book are exaggeration.

But for each point he will bring a Hadith, Ayah and/or a statement from the early generations.

They will also say that we cannot hope to be like the early generations, saying:

> [!text]
> فأين الثّرَى من الثُّريا
> 
> So where is the sand in comparison to the stars?

In response, the shaykh quotes the lines of poetry:

> [!text]
> فتَشَبَّهوا إن لم تكونوا مِثْلَهم ... إن التَّشَبَّهَ بِالكِرامِ فَلاحُ
> 
> Resemble them, even if you are not like them
> ... for indeed resembling the noble one is itself success
