---
"#": 28
title: Going Back to the Scholars & Respecting the Gatherings of Knowledge
Course: "[[4. Ta'dheem-ul-ilm]]"
Teacher: "[[Tim Humble]]"
Level: "[[0 - Introduction]]"
Pathway: "[[Introduction]]"
Watched: 2025-12-26
Notes: 2025-12-26
last-reviewed:
source_url: https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/introduction-to-studying-with-amau?cid=2812893&permalink=28-going-back-to-the-scholars-and-respecting-the-gatherings
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover: https://alpha.uscreencdn.com/video_thumbnails/zrtBOrLat4O-Ng.jpg?key1=gXHXjqtbOpMFeL8YnmMzSoeEdz5qOdXqLR3NvKzPA9P9E0izdCRTy71S48P3z3jf&key2=6ac7dbba0d9b4d49382e28ef98f25695
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
# The Fifteenth Principle: Refer the Problematic Aspects of Knowledge to the People of Knowledge

(A "mushkil" refers to anything that is hidden or problematic.)

**These issues should be taken back to the scholars.**

Then:
- If they speak regarding it, take what they say.
- If they are silent, be content with their silence. There will be a wisdom and reason for their silence.

## Dealing with tribulations and contemporary issues

These are from the most complex of matters.

There are two extremes:

1. Abandon seeking a fatwa from the scholars about it.

2. Ask the scholar, are fishing for the answer they want. Either by going from shaykh to shaykh, or asking the question in a manipulative way.

And the middle, correct position:

3. Turn the the scholars and adhere to their answer.

**And here we are talking about the major scholars.**

### Dealing with difference of opinion in such matters

The student of knowledge who has the ability should determine which of the opinions is more correct.

Those who do not have the ability / the general Muslims should:

1. Go with **the most cautious** of the two answers.

If the to answers seem similar in caution:

2. Go with who of the two scholars seems to be **more knowledgeable**

If the person cannot tell

3. Go with **the majority**

### Refuting the errors of scholars and the the statements of innovators

This falls under the complex matters that should be returned back to the people of knowledge, and not be dealt with by the small students of knowledge.

# The Sixteenth Principle: Respecting the Gatherings of Knowledge, and Honouring its Vessels (the books)

## Respecting the gatherings of knowledge

**The evidence for this:**:

> [!hadith] Narrated [[Qais ibn Kathir]]
> 
> إِنَّ الْعُلَمَاءَ وَرَثَةُ الأَنْبِيَاءِ
> 
> Indeed the scholars are the heirs of the Prophets
> 
> [Jami' at-Tirmidhi 2682](https://sunnah.com/tirmidhi:2682)

They inherited some rights, and did not inherit others. *From the rights they inherited is for their gatherings to be honoured and respected.*

**How to respect the rights of the gathering:**

- Sit in a well-mannered way.  
- Give the teacher full attention.  
- Avoid unnecessary movement, noise, or speaking to neighbors.  
- Minimize sneezing or yawning sounds, covering the mouth when necessary.      
- Late students should quietly sit at the back, without disrupting the lesson
- Do not arrive late and loudly give salaam

## Respecting the Vessels (books)

**How to respect the books**:

- Memorise them
- Take care of them
- Not use them for keeping things safe
- Not roll them into a tube
- Put them down gently
- Do not place them on the ground to read from
- Do not rest on them
- Do not place them near the feet
- Do not lick the fingers to turn the pages

> [!Quote] [[Ishaaq ibn Raahawayh]] once threw a book down. [[Imam Ahmad]] saw this and said:
> 
> “أهكذا يُفعل بكلام الأبرار؟”
> 
> “Is this how we treat the speech of the righteous?”

