---
"#": 1
title: Getting Started
Course: "[[A1.  An Introduction to the Science of Aqeedah ]]"
Teacher: "[[Tim Humble]]"
Level: "[[0 - Madkhal]]"
Pathway: "'Aqeedah & The Foundations of The Religion"
Watched: 2025-12-26
Notes: 2025-12-26
last-reviewed:
source_url: https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/aqeedah-the-foundations-of-the-religion?cid=2822961&permalink=01-getting-started
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover:
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
# Why do we need a madkhal? Why not start with a core book?

Before you start into any subject, there are fundamental things that you need to know about.

As discussed in the introductory course, the foundations to every science are 10, and many teachers will teach these points at the introduction of the book. 

**Having a separate introductory course has two main benefits:**

1. It allows detailed discussion of these 10 essential points

    - It saves repeating this information for each book
    - It saves from studying a book and not understanding these preliminary points
    - You can take some of the content of the science in an easier way before it is covered in the book
    
2. At AMAU, the focus is on classical texts, so we cam miss out on some essential points mentioned in modern books

    - Modern day books often offer an easy introduction to the science
    - The madkhal consists of key points from several modern books that are needed as a bridge to lead into the classical texts

**A further benefit**:

3. Gives a chance to cover the common issues and doubts that people are most concerned about when beginning to learn a science

# Definitions - Why Start with the Linguistic definition?

When discussion definitions, we usually discuss linguistic definitions first.

The Quran and Sunnah were sent down in the Arabic language:

> [!Quran] [[Yusuf]] ([[12:2]])
> إِنَّآ أَنزَلْنَـٰهُ قُرْءَٰنًا عَرَبِيًّۭا لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ ٢
> 
> Indeed, We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran so that you may understand.

The Prophet (SAW) spoke the Arabic language, and his Arabic was the purest and best of any person

Thus, the root of our religion is based within the Arabic language.

And these words are not separated from the meaning found in the Arabic language. The meaning of the word in the Arabic language will give us a clearer understanding of the religious meaning.

Some words do not have any specific Islamic definitions, they are understood by the linguistic meaning alone (Aqeedah is an example of this). Others will have a very specific Islamic meaning.

**For example "الصلاة"**:

**Linguistically:** Some scholars said it means “الدعاء”, others said it means “الصِلَة”/”connection”.

**Technically:** “A series of actions that begin with the takbir and finish with the taslim and contain a series of specific actions done in a specific order”

Thus the linguistic definition tells us that the root of our prayer is a Du’ah and connection with Allah, but also forms the foundation of the religious definition.