---
"#": 7
title: Two Important Questions Answered
Course: "[[A1.  An Introduction to the Science of Aqeedah ]]"
Teacher: "[[Tim Humble]]"
Level: "[[0 - Madkhal]]"
Pathway: "'Aqeedah & The Foundations of The Religion"
Watched: 2025-12-28
Notes: 2025-12-28
last-reviewed:
source_url: https://www.amauacademy.com/programs/aqeedah-the-foundations-of-the-religion?cid=2871502&permalink=07-two-important-questions-answered
banner: "[[brown and white wooden table.jpg]]"
cover: https://alpha.uscreencdn.com/270xnull/assets%2F27912%2Fplayer_image%2F1938675%2F7.1672663392.JPG
icon: "[[docs_300dp_F19E39_FILL0_wght400_GRAD0_opsz48.png]]"
---
Recall in lesson 2 ([[A2. Understanding the term 'Aqeedah]]), Ustadh asked two questions:

> **Question**: How do we know that these beliefs are those are specific to Islam? Where did we get the concept from? How do we know that there are not more or fewer? Where did we get this list from?
> 
> **Question**: In some of the books of Aqeedah, you sometimes find matters of Fiqh. Eg “from the Aqeedah of ahl al sunnah is wiping over the leather socks”.


Before we answer those, consider the following question.
# What is your religion?

It must be understood that this is an 'Aqidah question.

You will say Muslim, to separate yourself from the other Muslims. But what sort of Muslim?

You will say Sunni, to separate yourself from the Sh'iah. But what sort of Sunni?

At this point, whatever you answer must be an answer regarding Aqeedah. Thus Aqeedah is central to defining yourself as a Muslim.

**Do not mix between fiqh and aqeedah.**

Someone may answer by telling you what Madhhab they follow. This is a mistake! They were asked a question in Aqeedah and answered with an answer in Fiqh.

This could be ignorance, but it could be deception:
- By using the maddhab as a sheild to hide behind, so criticism of the persons Aqeedah is viewed as a criticism of their maddhab
- By legitimising differences in Aqeedah by comparing them to differences in fiqh

**Differences of positions in aqeedah and fiqh**

The two are not the same.

But, it is correct to say that there are some issues in aqeedah that Ahl-al-Sunnah differed over (permissible differences in aqeedah), and there are some issues in fiqh upon which there is consensus (impermissible to differ with). But what differs the sects in Aqeedah is not like that which differs the madhhabs in fiqh.

This is why it is important to know the issues that fall under a science **and** the issues that do not fall under a science, as well as the differences between the subjects.

# Question 1 - From where do we get our subject matter for Aqeedah? 

Recall, the subjects covered in Aqeedah are:
- 6 pillars of Iman (the majority of Aqeedah)
- Concept of Iman
- Sahaba
- Matters of rulership

How did we come to this list?

It is not enough to say Qur'an and Sunnah, and it is not enough to say that the definition of Aqeedah tells us. We need a clear boundry.

**We derived this list through "Al-Istiqraa'"**

> [!Definition] الاِستِقرَاء
> 
> From ق ر ء / reading
> 
> It is a comprehensive reading that comes with categorisation.

That is, to go through the whole of the Qur'an and Sunnah, and place each issue mentioned into a category.

This is how many categorisations (eg the categorisation of Tawheed into three).

Such a comprehensive analysis of the Quran and Sunnah leads to this list of issues.

This process is ijtihaad, and so there may be some discussion about certain topics that could be included or excluded.

However, on looking at the books of Aqeedah from any sect, we see that the effort has been solidified such that they are all limited to a certain number of issues.
# Question 2 - Why matters of furu' al-fiqh mentioned in books of Aqeedah? 

**They are not mentioned for themselves, but for what the indicate towards in deviancy in Aqeedah.**

The people who took a different position on these matters were from a deviant sect, so the position became a sign of the persons Aqeedah.

> [!quote] [[Abdullah ibn Mubarak]] said
> 
> إِذَا رَأَيْتُ الرَّجُلَ يَسْأَلُ عَنْ حُكْمِ الْمَسْحِ عَلَى الْخُفَّيْنِ أَسَأْتُ بِهِ الظَّنَّ
> 
> if I see a man coming to ask me about wiping over the leather socks, what is it allowed or not, I think bad thoughts of him

He said this, because it is the Shi'ah who differed with Ahl al-Sunnah on the matter of the leather socks.

Note: it is possible for someone within Ahl al-Sunnah to have confusion over the particular issue in fiqh. But in general, they a sign of the persons Aqeedah.
